Hi everyone, I'm Norman Wildberger.
Welcome to this lecture on
a new way of thinking about arithmetic by using
the idea of a multi-set, this foundational data
structure concept to build up the entire theory,
including algebra, in a systematic or step-by-step
fashion, from really the most essential simple
kind of object perhaps that we can imagine, which
is an empty set or an empty multi-set. So what
we're doing here is trying to expand our point
of view from the set-theoretical orientation that
20th-century mathematics largely had, which was,
of course, built up from the need of analysts
to have a foundation for their understanding
of analysis on the Continuum. So Dedekind's
theory of real numbers required Cantor's theory
of infinite sets, and so the need for infinite
sets became important. And then this 20th-century
axiomatic approach to set theory was the sort of
philosophical substitute for a proper foundation.
And since then, more and more mathematicians have
leaned on sets as sort of foundational objects in
mathematics and have tried to frame everything,
or largely everything, in terms of sets.
Now, sets are well and good, but they're really
only one of several possible data structures that
are available to us, and in particular, multi-sets
are a very important alternative, and they allow
us to see a lot of different things in a very
different light. So today, we're going to see
a really good example of that because we're going
to move towards exponentiation. This is the third
of our operations in this world of multi-sets, and
it's quite different from the exponentiation that
you're familiar with, so be prepared for some
serious novelty, and we're going to have to go
slowly and carefully. I'm going to exhibit lots of
examples so you can see how this actually works,
and at the end of the video, you'll see that
there are actually some really remarkable
properties that this thing has, so it really
is deserving of our study and our attention.
The basic framework is that we've set up this
idea of inductive or recursive building up of
ever more complicated objects, starting with
zero, which is just the empty mset, and then
msets of zero are called natural numbers. Msets
of natural numbers are called poly numbers. Msets
of poly numbers are called multi numbers,
and of course, we could carry on like this.
Today, what we're going to do is we're
going to introduce some parallel things:
first of all, some counting functions that
allow us to roughly assign sizes to some
of these multi-sets that we're looking at.
So we're going to introduce Z, N, P, and M,
obviously paralleling these different types. And
so these are going to be counting functions, with
N being the one that's most familiar, counting
the number of objects in a set or a collection.
And then we're going to look at this hierarchy of
operations that is potentially available to us,
starting with addition and then multiplication,
and moving crucially today to exponentiation.
And throughout, I want you to have this idea
that we're looking in this direction, and we
can sort of see that the steps that we're taking
can be extended in a very obvious and natural way,
right? So at all of these points, I want you
to be thinking, "I wonder what happens if
we go one step further or two steps further
or something like this?" Things get richer,
they get more complicated, we get a bigger
picture. So there's a lot of thinking to be
done and try to move in this direction in this
interesting, somewhat new world of mathematics.
Now, before I go on, it's the beginning of
New Year 2023, so happy New Year to everyone,
and a special thanks to my Patreon supporters
and to members of my Wild Egg Mathematics Courses
YouTube channel. You guys are great. Thanks so
much for your support. It's really appreciated.
All right, so this video will be very much
building on Math Foundations 227 and 228,
the two previous ones, so please make sure
you watch them. But a very quick review:
so we have these different types. Zero is
just the empty mset, denoted with brackets
like this or with the symbol zero. So that's
what zero is in our world. Natural numbers
are msets of zeros. For example, that's an
mset of zeros, and the simplest one is an
mset just consisting of zero. That's going to
be called one. This one here is called four.
So this is where the usual primary school natural
number arithmetic takes place. Then, one step up,
msets of natural numbers are called poly
numbers. The simplest one is Alpha zero,
which is not already a natural
number, and zero is Alpha zero,
which is the mset consisting of
one. Here's a typical poly number,
which can then be interpreted as in the form
two plus Alpha zero plus Alpha zero cubed.
Then to the next stage, multi numbers are
msets of poly numbers. So, for example,
this thing here, that's a polynomial, that's
a polynomial, that's a polynomial. So,
that's an mset of poly numbers. And then, when
we introduce this new notation, Alpha one for
the mset containing Alpha zero, Alpha two
for the mset containing Alpha zero squared,
Alpha three containing Alpha zero cubed,
then we can write something like this as a
multinomial if you like, involving several
variables. In this case, Alpha zero, Alpha one,
Alpha two, Alpha four, and in principle,
we could have more and more variables.
Then, addition is the sort of fundamental object.
If you have an mset here, another mset here,
the way you add them is you just dump
the contents out into another box. So,
this mc01, this number three, this
mc2 get moved in the other box,
and the two elements here, one
and four, get moved in the box.
Multiplication is a little bit more
sophisticated. The way you multiply
two msets is that you add the elements
of this mset with the elements of this
set in all possible ways and form a
multi-set of all those possible sums.
So, this one here has two elements, multi-set
06 and number one. This one also, two elements,
number four and multi-set two. When we multiply
them, we have to take the sum of this and this,
which is this mset, sum of this and this, which
is this one, sum of this and this, which is this,
and some of this and this, which is this.
Make sure that you understand those examples.
So, that's a very quick overview, and now
we want to go further. So, we've informally
used the word "element of an mset." Let me be
a little bit more careful about that and also
introduce some important notation. So, here's an
example of an mset consisting of zero, zero, one,
and another mset containing two and three. So,
we'll say that the elements of this mset are zero,
zero, one, two, three. So, this is a big box and
inside it has other boxes, and those other boxes
very well may have other stuff inside them, okay?
But the boxes that you can see are the elements
of the bigger box, including their contents. So,
we then write, to denote this element relation,
zero is an element of A, one is an element of A,
and this multi-set two, three is an element of A.
So, these are all separate true statements.
And if X is a general mset, then we're going
to introduce this kind of notation to allow us to
describe the elements. So, the brackets mean mset,
okay, and here is sort of the object that we're
considering or the objects that we're considering,
and the colon here represents some condition, and
the condition is that little X belongs to capital
X. In other words, there's an element of capital X
in this set here. So, what we're saying here, this
is the way of thinking about X. It's the multi-set
consisting of all X where X is an element of X.
So, in this case, we would have
to run through all of these: zero,
zero, one, and two, three, as we are running
through the elements of X. In other words,
we have to respect the natural multiplicities that
are occurring here throughout. Okay, so it's very
different from set theory in that way. There's
two zeros here, we have to keep those two zeros
separate, we have to keep track of
them, there's two of them there.
Let me illustrate the usefulness of this
notation by starting again with this mset A,
and here are some other msets defined
in terms of the elements of A. So,
B is the mset of things in the form A
plus one, where A is in capital A. So,
we have to take each one of these elements, and we
have to add one to them. So, zero plus one is one,
zero plus one is one, one plus one is two, and
if we add one to this, well, remember, one is the
mset consisting of zero. So, when we add those
two msets, we get the mset zero, two, three.
Here's mset C, which is the set of two
times A where A is an element of A. So,
we have to multiply each of these things
by two. Okay, so two times zero is zero,
two times zero is zero, two times one is two,
two times this thing is this mset right here.
Here is a more complicated thing where we're
taking two M sets, say this A and this B,
and we're actually taking their product,
AB, or we could possibly, more precisely,
say A times B. All right, we will sometimes use
this, but actually this is probably preferred,
okay? And so, what is the definition of that?
Well, in terms of this notation, it's the set
of A plus B such that A belongs to capital A and
B belongs to capital B. So, what we have to do is
we have to go through these two sets here and take
sums of things. So, the zero and the one is one,
the zero and the one is one, the zero and the two
is two, and the zero and plus this is itself. And
then when we repeat it with this one, we get the
same thing. And then when we add one, we're going
to get two, two, three. And this thing, when
we add two, three to everything, we get two,
three plus one is this one, two, three plus one
is this one, two, three plus two is this one here,
because two is the mset consisting of two zeros.
And finally, when we add this one and this one,
we get this one here. Okay, so it's a
convenient kind of notation for us all right.
Now let's introduce these counting
functions which tell us how big msets are,
and there's different levels of
counting functions, sort of more
sophisticated ones as we go on. So,
we're working always with pure msets,
I remind you. That's the framework where we start
with the empty msets and we only create msets by
using empty msets and containments of
boxes and boxes. Okay, so there are no
other external mathematical objects at this stage,
we just have empty boxes and we put those empty
boxes inside other boxes to form sort of nested
collections of boxes, so there's nothing else.
Okay, so the first function, very simple, is that
if A is a pure mset, we define Z of A to be zero,
the empty mset. So, every mset when you apply the
Zed counting function to it, you always get zero.
It's pretty simple. N. So, N is defined this
way: if A is a pure set, then capital N of A
is the mset consisting of things that form
as Z of A as A runs through A. So, for each
element of capital A, we take Z of that. In other
words, we're essentially replacing it with zero.
So, we're looking inside A, oh there's all
these boxes, we're replacing each of those
boxes and all their contents with a single
zero, single zero, single zero, single zero.
The result then is naturally a natural number
because we're getting an mset of zeros. So,
for example, if A is this same set here, then
Z of A, of course, is zero, and N of A, well,
we have to apply Z to each of the elements.
So, is that a zero? Z is zero, Z of one,
and Z of the mset two, three. Well, each of these
is zero, so we get zero, zero, zero, zero, and
we recognize that's the natural number four. So,
this is how we are counting in sort of the naive,
basic fashion. The N function is doing that, it's
basically replacing elements with zeros. It might
be worthwhile to point out that this is in some
sense like almost a prehistoric kind of simple
kind of thing. It's analogous to some kids 100,000
years ago seeing some animals at a waterhole, and
they want to convey how many animals there are,
and so they're going to go, there's an animal,
there's an animal, there's an animal, there's
an animal, there's that many animals. So,
they walk home, they say, oh look, that's
how many animals there are at the waterhole.
So, you don't really need a
prior language of numbers;
you just need some physical representation,
some simpler representation of the complicated
set out there. Sort of what we're doing
here, the fingers are being represented
just by these zeros. These zeros here are just
representing these more complicated objects.
Now, let's go to one level higher
and define the P counting function.
So, P of an mset A is the mset of N of A where A
is in capital A. So, each of the elements of A, we
apply N to it, getting therefore a natural number,
and then we put all those natural numbers in an
mset. So, obviously, what we're getting here
is a poly number, necessarily by definition.
So, what we're doing now is we're assigning a more
sophisticated sort of object to this thing that
we're counting that might be roughly analogous to
a more sophisticated child who goes and sees the
five animals at the water hole and says, "Aha!
But they're actually three antelope." Well,
it doesn't say three, he says, "There are this
many antelope, antelope, antelope, antelope," and
"There are this many lions, lion, lion." Okay, and
he walks home like this and says, "Look, this is
what's at the water hole: antelopes, lions." Okay,
that's more information, that's more detailed
information than just saying that there's this
many animals. That's sort of what we're doing.
And then, next level, the multiset
analog M of A is the mset of P of
little A's where A is in capital A. Okay,
let's do an example. So, here is an mset
B. So, there's an mset, there's an mset, there's
an mset. Okay, so Z of B, well, Z of B is always
zero. N of B, we have to replace the elements
with zero. So, this element is replaced with zero,
this element is replaced with zero, this element
is replaced with zero. Again, zero, zero, zero,
which is the number three. So, N of B is three.
What is P of B? Well, we have to take N of this,
we have to take N of this, we have to take N
of this, and we have to form an mset of those,
alright? So, what is N of this? Well, that
means we have to count what's inside here. So,
what does that mean? It means that we have to
look inside this absent and apply Z to each of
the elements. So, we have to apply Z to 2 and
we have to apply Z to 4. We're going to get 0,
0. So, N of this thing is the mset 0, 0, which is
the number two. Here, when you get the mset 0, 0,
0, which is the number three, here, we're going
to get the mset 0, 0, which is the number two.
So, this thing, it's a poly number, it's an mset
of natural numbers, is the P of B, this mset B.
It's a sort of more refined information,
right? The N of B is telling you, "Okay,
this thing has three things in it," that's
what that's telling you. This thing here
is telling you more. You can still see that
there's three things in it, but you can tell
more about what those three things are, but
still not enough information to recover them.
What about M of B? Well, so now what we have to
do is we have to take the elements of B and we
have to apply P to each one of them. So, we have
to take P of this thing, we have to take P of this
mset, we have to take P of this mset, and form an
mset of them. Okay, so what is P of this one here?
How do we do that? P of this is going to be N of
each one of these. Okay, what's N of 2? That's
a good question. What is N of two? So, what
is 2? Well, 2 is the mset consisting of 0, 0.
So, if you replace each one of those zeros with
zero, you're going to get the same mset, you're
going to get two back again. So, N of two is
two. In fact, N of any natural number is itself.
Okay, so that's what N of two is. What is
N of this thing? Well, this mset only has
one thing in it, so its size is one. Okay,
so P of this thing is the mset two, one.
P of this thing is going to be zero, one, one,
the same thing as itself because these guys
are all natural numbers and an N of them are
each themselves. What is P of this? Well, we
have to apply N to each of these. So, what's N of
this? Well, it's one. What's N of this? It's one.
And so, P of this thing is mset one, one.
And M of the entire thing is this thing here.
So, again, this is like a little bit
more detailed information than P of B,
right? This is telling you more. It's still sort
of like this. I mean, you can see that there's
two things here, and there's three things
here, and there's two things here. Usually,
you can recover that, but it's telling you
a little bit more about the structure, but
still not enough information to actually recover
the B. Of course, if we went one step further,
then maybe things would be different.
You might like to think about that.
Okay, so we have a natural hierarchy of
counting functions now that allows us to,
you know, talk about the sizes
of msets in some fashion but
in a rather flexible fashion. We can
talk about sizes at different levels.
Now, we want to talk about operations because we
want to move towards the exponentiation operation.
So, addition, we've already talked about.
If A and B are msets, here's the definition,
here is a possible definition of what their sum
is. So, A plus B, it's the mset of A's and B's
where A is in A and B is in B. So, we just form
this mset. For each element of A, we've put it
in there; for each element of the B, we have
to put it in there. We just form a big mset.
Maybe this is a kind of a strange notation,
but I think it's at least somewhat indicative
of what we're doing. But of course, we
know what that is, right? We're just
taking the two boxes and dumping them out
into another box, and that's the addition.
Here's an example: there's an mset, there's an
mset, here's the sum in the obvious fashion.
Multiplication. Now, we can also
express that, as we've already seen,
in terms of our notation. Okay, so A times
B is the set or the mset of A plus B such
that little A is in capital A and little B
is in capital B. So, we have to go through
all possible pairings of elements in A and
elements in B, and we have to add them.
Okay, that mset that we get is the product of the
msets. Here's an example: there's an mset, has
one element there, one element there, one element
there, one element there. Okay, so they should be
able together, four elements in their product.
There's one element, I guess there's another,
there's another, there's another. So,
you can check that I've done it correct.
Alright, so here's the definition of the
exponentiation operation, and I warn you again,
okay, that you're going to have to maybe make
a separate compartment in your mind for this
because this is not exactly the same as the
exponentiation that you're familiar with,
although we're still going to use the
same notation, the kind of familiar wedge.
Okay, so we have two msets A
and B, and we define A wedge B,
the exponentiation of A and B, and it's
the obvious thing. Okay, it is the mset
consisting of all A times B's where A belongs to
capital A and little B belongs to capital B. So,
we look at all possible pairs of elements in A
and elements in B, and this time we multiply them.
To define multiplication, we added them. To define
exponentiation, we're going to multiply them.
See, in some sense, this is like,
you know, so blindingly obvious,
isn't it? I mean, it's like what else
could you do, what else could you do?
Okay, so what actually happens? So, here's
an example: let's say this thing is A,
there's an mset, here's another mset, let's
call it B. We want to exponentiate them;
let's instead of multiplying them, we're
going to exponentiate them. Okay, so what
do we have to do? Well, we have to take pairs
of elements. So, this element, mset one, two,
we're going to have to multiply it by zero; we're
also going to have to multiply it by this mset.
We're going to take this element
and this element and multiply them;
we have to take this and this and
multiply them. Okay, what did we get?
So, anything times zero is
zero, that's easy to check.
To multiply these two msets, we have to, again,
form all possible pairs, and this time, add them.
One plus zero is one, one plus three is four, two
plus zero is two, and two plus three is five. So,
we're going to get the mset one, four, two,
five. Four times zero is zero, four times this,
well, you can work it out, you're just going
to get these things here repeated four times,
so you're going to get zero, zero,
zero, zero, three, three, three.
Okay, so those are the various possible
products, and there are four of them,
and the mset formed by them is the wedge of A
and B, or the exponentiation of A and B. Let's
note in this case here that with respect to the
counting functions, okay? So, if we looked at Z of
A and Z of B and took their wedge, well, the Z of
anything is zero, so zero wedge zero is zero. And
please convince yourself that that's zero; that
certainly is that of A wedge B. So, trivially,
this exponentiation satisfies compatibility
with Z. What about compatibility with N?
So, what's N of A? This thing here has two
elements, and N of B, this thing here has also
two elements. So, two wedge two, okay? What
is two wedge two? So, this is the mset 0 0,
and this one's the mset 0 0. So, we have to
form all possible pairs and multiply them,
but zero times zero is zero, so we're going to
get four zeros, so we're gonna get 0 0 0 0, which
is four. In other words, we're getting the same as
the product, so actually when it comes to numbers,
exponentiation of numbers is the
same as multiplication of numbers.
Okay, maybe you object to that, but just
bear with me, okay? That's the way it is.
Alright, so that's four. And what about N of A
wedge B? Well, here's A wedge B, and it has one,
two, three, four elements. So, yes indeed, N of A
wedge B is equal to N of A wedge B. What about P
of A wedge, P of B? We can practice our counting.
So, what's P of this thing here? Well, we have to
count how many N of this and N of this, and this
is two, and this is four, and this—what's N of
zero? It's zero. What's N of this? It's two; there
are two things in here. Now, when we exponentiate
these two msets, we have to form all possible
products, so two times zero is zero, two times
two is four, four times zero is zero, four times
two is eight, so we're getting the mset 0 4 0 8.
And what about A wedge B here? It is here. What
is P of that? N of this is zero, and this is zero.
N of this is four, and this is eight. So,
in this case at least, we see that P of A
wedge, P of B is equal to P of A wedge
B. What about M of A wedge, M of B? Well,
these guys are all multinumbers, both of
them, because they're msets of polynumbers.
And it's not too hard to see that if you
have a multinumber and you apply M to it,
you're going to get itself. So, M
of A equals A, and M of B equals B.
And if you take A wedge B, which is this
thing here, that's also a multinumber,
so M of it is also A wedge B. So, yes indeed,
this also is satisfied for M. So, we have a
kind of compatibility between exponentiation and
the operation Z, P, and M, at least in this case.
So, you might like to think about whether this
is just a happy accident or whether it happens
more generally. So, I want to look at a slightly
more complicated example where one of the msets,
at least, is below a multinumber. Okay, so this
one here, A, is an mset consisting of two msets,
and this mset here consists of a number
and another mset. So, we have a sort of,
you know, three levels of nesting before we get
to the numbers. So, this is not a multinumber;
this is a multinumber over here because
these guys are both polynumbers. But
these guys here are not polynumbers;
this one here itself is a multinumber,
so it's one step further. So, let's have
a look at what A wedge B is in this case.
So, still, we have to take products. So,
we have to take this element times two and
this element times mset one three.
We have to take this three times
two and this three times one three.
Okay, what happens when we do this?
So when we multiply, apply anything by two,
basically we're just sort of doubling all the
entries. So we're going to get 1 1 M. So two M
Z two. So when we do this product here, we have
to form all possible combinations and form sums.
So one plus one is two, one plus three is four.
This mset, two plus one is mset 2 0, and mset
two plus three is mset 2000, because remember
3 is just mset zero zero zero. Okay, this
mset three times two is mset three three,
and this one here with the addition then we get
to 4 6. So there's the exponentiation of A and B.
Now I'm just making a little check here so you can
see if I've done it right. I claim that N of A,
well clearly Z of A, where instead of B, and
Z of A wedge B, that's happening all the time,
but here N of A is 2. And N of B is 2, and their
wedge, as we've seen, is four, and that is indeed
the number of elements in A wedge B. And P of
A wedge, P of B, well, there's my calculation,
and you can convince yourself that's P of A
wedge B. And I've also done M of A wedge, M of B.
Now, what does M of this thing here? So M of
this thing is we have to apply P to each of
the elements here. Okay, so this is P of this.
How do we apply it? What do we do there to form
P of that? Well, we have to take N of each one of
these. So N of 1 is 1, and N of this thing is one.
And similarly, what is P of this thing? Well, P
of this thing is N of what's inside. So N of 3
is 3. So we're getting the mset 3. And this thing
is a multinumber, so M of it is itself. And then,
the multiplication, and we can convince ourselves
that we're getting M of A wedge B again.
So it seems we've got a little bit more
evidence that this exponentiation operation
is behaving nicely with respect
to these basic counting functions.
So here are some other additional
properties of the exponentiation
operation that are worthwhile, you
know, just being explicit about.
And it's important to note the difference between
this one and the usual exponentiation operation.
And let me remind you that this is happening
much more broadly, right? We're exponentiating
multinumbers by multinumbers, and we're in
principle, we're exponentiating, you know,
huge towers of nested msets with huge towers of
nested msets. Okay, it's all completely done in
a recursive fashion. It's actually making
a computation like this is something that
your computer is likely going to be very good at,
but maybe for us, it's a little bit challenging.
But hey, it's good to have mathematics which
our computers can do really easily and well.
Okay, so the basic properties: well, the thing is
commutative. Okay, why is it commutative? Well,
it's because the exponentiation is defined
in terms of the multiplication, and the
multiplication is commutative. And ultimately, why
is multiplication commutative? It's because it's
defined in terms of addition, and addition
is commutative. And similarly, this thing
is associative. If you have three of them and you
exponentiate them like this, that ultimately comes
down to looking at expressions of the form little
a times little b times little c, and we know that
multiplication is associative. It doesn't matter
how you bracket those things. And the reason for
that is because, well, it comes just directly down
to addition, because addition is associative. And
it's ultimately because when you bump contents of
boxes into other boxes, the order is unimportant.
So this thing here has a well-defined meaning.
So we just, well, write A wedge B wedge C is a
mset of things that form A times B times C, where
little A is an A, little B is in B, and little C
is in C. And then there's a distributive law.
There are actually two of them. Of course,
the A plus B wedge C is A wedge C plus B
wedge C. And let's just observe that the usual
convention is that these higher operations have
precedence. So when we see something like this,
we have to do these exponentiations
before we do the addition. All right,
so this means first do A wedge
C, B wedge C, and then add them.
And then there's some sort of identity-type
properties. Zero wedge anything is zero,
it's easy to see. And like a kind of a counting
thing, that if you wedge something with one,
you're going to get N of A. So A is some
M set, and you're wedging it with one,
you're taking the exponentiation with one. So one
is mset zero. So what you have to do is you have
to multiply zero by each one of the elements of A,
zero times this element, zero times this element,
etc. So what you end up doing is you're
just replacing all the elements with zero,
and the mset that you're
getting then is just N of A.
It's just you just kept essentially counting the
number of elements in A. So that's an important
kind of way of thinking about the exponentiation,
right? It's performing an important function that
exponentiating with one is just basically
counting, counting at the end level.
And then if we go up one, right, so we go to poly
numbers, this thing here, mset one, which is Alpha
zero or Alpha Sub Zero, that is going to have
the property that's going to be playing the role
of the identity. If we wedge that with any A in
either order, we're going to get A. Why is that?
Well, because, you know, here's an M set A, it has
various elements, and we're wedging it with mset
one. So what does that mean we have to do? Well,
we have to perform all possible pairs between this
one and these other guys, and we have to multiply
them. So we have to do one times this one times
this one times this, etc. Well, the one is acting
as the identity in the multiplication level. Okay,
um, and so this mset one is going to act as
the identity at the exponentiation level.
See? And it's kind of beautiful.
You can kind of sort of see that
these patterns are just going to keep on
extending, right? This is big arithmetic.
Okay, so we are going to talk more about
exponentiation because in fact it has a
very important consequence in terms of rethinking
our framework for multinumbers. But what I want
to do before that is connect directly with
computer science. So probably a lot of you
will have figured this out already by now: that
this discussion of M sets nested in each other is
really very close to a discussion of trees, which
we sort of refer to as rooted trees in computer
science. And so I want to talk about that, and
I want to show you that in fact, in some sense,
this arithmetic has probably been under the
noses of the computer scientists for a long time.
In fact, I wouldn't at all be surprised if
some computer scientist somewhere or other
had already developed this kind of thing. In
fact, it would be a little bit of a surprise
if that wasn't the case, to be honest. But in any
case, I think it'll be quite interesting because
it'll give us another kind of way of visualizing
what this arithmetic looks like. Hope you'll
join me for that. I'm Norman Wildberger.
Thanks for listening and happy New Year!